CHAPTERS I AND II OF ROMANS
This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Reading by Simon Wainwright
The Epistle of Paul to the Romans, King James Version, Chapter 1
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God,
which he had promised afore by his prophets in the Holy Scriptures,
concerning his son, Jesus Christ our Lord,
which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh,
and declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of holiness
by the resurrection from the dead,
by whom we have received grace and apostleship for obedience to the faith
among all nations for his name, among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ.
To all that be in Rome, beloved of God,
called to be saints, grace to you, and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all,
that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.
For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son,
that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers,
making requests if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous journey
by the will of God to come unto you.
For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift.
To the end ye may be established, that is, that I may be comforted together with you
by the mutual faith, both of you and me.
Now, I would not have you ignorant, brethren,
that often times I proposed to come unto you,
but was let hitherto that I might have some fruit among you.
Also, even as among other Gentiles,
I am a debtor both to the Greeks and to the barbarians,
both to the wise and to the unwise.
So as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you,
that are at Rome also.
For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ,
for it is the power of God unto salvation
to every one that believeth,
to the Jew first and also to the Greek.
For therein is the righteousness of God revealed
from faith to faith,
as it is written,
the just shall live by faith.
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all,
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
who hold the truth in unrighteousness.
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God hath showed it unto them.
For the invisible things of him
from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made,
even his eternal power and Godhead,
so that they are without excuse.
Because that when they knew God
they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful,
but became vain in their imaginations
and their foolish heart was darkened.
Professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools
and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God
into an image made like to corruptible man
and to birds and four-footed beasts
and creeping things.
Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness
through the lust of their own hearts
to dishonor their own bodies between themselves,
who changed the truth of God into a lie
and worshipped and served the creature
more than the Creator,
who is blessed forever.
Amen.
For this cause God gave them up
unto vile affections,
for even their women did change the natural use
into that which is against nature,
and likewise also the men,
leaving the natural use of the woman
burned in their lust one toward another,
men with men,
working that which is unseemly
and receiving in themselves
that recompense of their error,
which was meat.
And, even as they did not like
to retain God in their knowledge,
God gave them over to a reprobate mind
to do those things which are not convenient,
being filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness,
full of envy, murder, debate,
deceit, malignity, whisperers,
back-biters, haters of God,
despiteful, proud, boasters,
inventors of evil things,
disobedient to parents,
without understanding, covenant-breakers,
without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful,
who, knowing the judgment of God,
that they which commit such things
are worthy of death,
not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them.
Chapter 2
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art that judgest.
For wherein thou judgest another,
thou condemnest thyself.
For thou that judgest doest the same things.
But we are sure that the judgment of God
is according to truth,
against them which commit such things.
And thinkest thou this, O man,
that judgest them which do such things,
and doest the same,
that thou shalt escape the judgment of God?
Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness
and forbearance and long-suffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God
leadeth thee to repentance?
But after thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up unto thyself wrath
against the day of wrath,
in revelation of the righteous judgment of God,
who will render to every man
according to his deeds,
to them who, by patient continuance in well-doing,
seek for glory and honor and immortality eternal life,
but unto them that are contentious
and do not obey the truth,
but obey unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man
that doeth evil of the Jew first
and also of the Gentile.
But glory, honor, and peace to every man
that worketh good to the Jew first
and also to the Gentile.
For there is no respect of persons with God.
For as many as have sinned without law
shall also perish without law.
And as many as have sinned in the law
shall be judged by the law.
For not the hearers of the law are just before God,
but the doers of the law shall be justified.
For when the Gentiles which have not the law
do by nature the things contained in the law,
these having not the law are a law unto themselves.
Which show the work of the law written in their hearts,
their conscious also bearing witness and their thoughts,
the meanwhile accusing or else excusing one another.
In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men
by Jesus Christ according to my gospel,
behold, thou art called a Jew,
and restest in the law,
and makest thy boast of God,
and knowest his will,
and approvest the things that are more excellent
being instructed out of the law,
and art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind,
a light of them which are in darkness,
an instructor of the foolish,
a teacher of babes which has the form of knowledge,
and of the truth in the law.
Thou therefore which teachest another
teachest thou not thyself.
Thou that preachest a man
should not steal, dost thou steal?
Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery,
dost thou commit adultery?
Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?
Thou that makest thy boast of the law through
breaking the law dishonest thou God?
For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles
through you as it is written,
for circumcision verily profiteth if thou keep the law,
but if thou be a breaker of the law,
thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.
Therefore, if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law,
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?
And shall not uncircumcision,
which is by nature if it fulfill the law,
judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision
dost transgress the law?
For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly,
neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh,
but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly,
and circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit
and not in the letter,
whose praise is not of men, but of God.